All right.
Moving on we've seen how to define a basic class.
We've even seen an ad in the init method and also some instance attributes.
So in our example of the user the user class we have first last an age our instance attributes and remember
attributes are just like pieces of data that are associated with each individual user.
At least instance attributes are.
We'll talk about class attributes and a little bit.
So each instance the user has its own first last and age.
Now we're going to talk about instance methods.
So this is where object oriented programming really gets to be a lot more useful.
To be honest because right now we're just organizing you know pieces of data into an object which frankly
we could have just done like this we could have created a dictionary and had first colon and then Joe.
I won't make you watch the whole thing but you know last Colin Smith and for each user why not just
represent it with this.
I go through all of the work of doing all of this here.
Well once we had methods in to our instances things become a lot more useful.
So if you recall in the video where I introduced this little poker example and it had the non-addict
warranted example.
And then here was the example of using object oriented programming.
There is missing code the class definition is in alpha.
But notice how a initialized a new deck.
And then I'm calling Dechert shuffle deck.
Deal hand deck dot reset.
Where are those methods defined and how do we actually do that.
So each deck each instance of the deck class has its own shuffle or its own deal hand.
So let me show you how we do that.
It's actually really really easy.
All we do is traditionally we go and write all the instance methods after anet.
So anything that starts that double underscores and ends double underscores should go at the top of
your class.
I don't think you actually break anything.
It's just convention to put it up top.
OK so I'm going to come down here.
And first let's talk about what we would actually put in an instance method.
So in this case for a user maybe you would make a simple method that just returns the full name first
space last to do that.
We just write def and then a name and the method.
Of course we have to be inside the class.
So pay attention to your indentation let's call it full underscore name.
So this is just a regular function but it becomes a method because we're adding it to an object.
It's part of a class.
And so whenever we initialize a user to a method on that user just like when we initialize a list and
we call that pop.
This is an empty list but if we called up pop this is an instance of list pop.
It's a method versus things like print that is a function.
It's not on an object.
Hopefully that's clear.
OK so def file name and Folman doesn't need to take any power there's no parameters no need to pass
any arguments.
I just want the full name to come back.
The thing is we still need to provide self.
And if you didn't catch my note in the last video you do not have to call this parameter self.
It's conventional to call it self.
I've never seen anyone really use any other name but you could call this.
I don't know instance of user or thingy.
Totally up to you but self is pretty much all I've ever seen.
And any time we define an instance method we need to pass self as the first perimeter and in this case
that's all.
And then inside the method we have access to self.
So all I want to do is return first space last.
I can't do this return to an empty string and I can't just do first to reference first.
I still have to do self first and then I'll do space self at last.
OK so any time we did find an instance method each copy of the user.
So each instance of the User class made from this blueprint has its own full name method and that full
name is going to return its particular first name and its particular last name separated by space.
So every user assuming they have a different first and last name.
This will return something different.
So let's test it out.
Now I have these two users.
Let's just do print user to dot and we just call it like any other method that we've done.
Pop.
You need the parentheses afterwards.
Print is a function but same idea and executed and there we go.
Blanca Lopez.
So first space last name.
OK so let's try one more just to get in the groove here.
Let's do one called initials.
So Def initials.
It's not going to take any parameters other than self but it should return the first letter of first
name period.
It should be like J.
As for Joe Smith.
OK so let's do this now.
Def initials.
We can just do a single line return and it's going to be self-taught first to zero with character.
Period.
Last zero with character period again.
OK so hopefully you can see the pattern here.
This is just a regular function definition but it's in it's inside of a class and that makes it special.
We will see how to define something called a class method.
So this is an instance method.
Every instance of user has its own method a class method works a bit different.
It's part of the class will talk about it later.
Let's just focus on these.
So full name and initials self always is the first parameter.
So in these two cases it's the only one.
But if I wanted to pass something else in like let's just do one more here called Def likes and all
that it will do is spit out somebody's name space like a thing.
So we'll take a thing as a parameter here and I just want to print out something like.
Joe likes candy if thing is Candy.
So I would call it by doing user one dot likes and then pass on.
I don't know.
Ice cream.
Silly example.
But I do want to show that it's when you pass a parameter and you don't need to access it self.
It's just like any other function we we've written or defined.
You have access to that parameter.
So this looks like this return F and then we would just have name so self-caused let's just do first
likes and then thing.
So we don't access self so any time we're trying to refer to the specific current instance.
So if I'm calling user one likes self is going to refer to User 1 I'm calling user to dog likes self
refers to user to and then thing is just what's being passed in.
So let's test these two things out see what happens.
See what I want to do.
Let's do print user one likes ice cream and then print user to likes.
I don't know.
Chips.
Chips meaning like crisps not fries if you're British.
OK.
And we get Joe like ice cream banca likes chips so you can see inside of this instance method by referring
to the individual instance and something that's been passed in self is always going to be the first
parameter in any instance method.
We never actually pass anything in.
The first thing.
Python takes care of all that for us.
So instance method.
So first let's take it.
Check out our initials.
So let's just.
And use are two dot initials and user one save.
Test it out.
There we go.
B-L Blanca what was it.
Lopez and J Yes.
Joe smith something like that.
Very forgettable name.
I apologize if your name is Joe Smith.
OK.
And just around the sauf let's add one more methadone that does something with age.
Let's define one called is senior.
So in the US senior citizens are defined as being 65 years or older.
So it should be a boolean method that returns true or false depending on if age is greater than or equal
to 65.
So nice and easy just call it is Senior self.
And then we just need to return what we want we want self-taught age greater than or equal to 65.
So instead of doing if self that age is greater than 65 return TRUE else return false just return this.
This itself is a boolean expression returns true or false.
And actually all of these methods have shown you are purely retrieving information.
There's this idea of getters versus setters.
These are getting information but we're never changing first last or age.
So let me just show you one more.
Let's do one called.
I don't know.
First day
and all that birthday will do is add 1 to age and then return a message it says Happy Birthday whatever.
So self.
And then we'll just do self-taught age plus 1 and then let's return a string that says happy and then
let's put the age in there.
Self-taught age th.
Like happy 60 fifth birthday comma and need my F for that and then we'll do self-taught first.
OK.
So it should be you know happy 69th birthday Joe.
Happy Forty-Second birthday Blanca.
So just to show you that we can update these attributes.
They're not static they're not stuck in whatever we first assign them to be.
OK so we have a bunch of methods.
Let's test them all out we've done likes and initials comment that out for now let's do
let's do is senior for user 2.
And so user 2 is Howel's 41.
So this should be false.
Let's do first day for user 1.
OK let's test it out.
And then also after that let me do a print user one dot page so we can see if age has changed.
Actually print it before and after.
See what happens.
So we get false for the senior.
That's right.
Age for user 1 was 68.
Then I called birthday and it happy 69.
Joe I guess it should say s.a birthday and then ages now 69.
OK.
So we've seen a bunch of different instance methods.
This is where objects and classes start to shine.
They're no longer just storage places for information or data.
They also have functionality.
Fun stuff.
What else.
Let me just wrap up.
Self needs to be there for every instance method we define.
If let's say you might think OK I'm going to just have a method that doesn't access self like say hello
but if I just wanted something called say hi and all that it does every time is PRINT Hello.
All right.
So if I tried to then run that by calling.
I don't know user one dot say Hi it's not using self.
So I don't need to add it.
Well actually if we do try and run it it gives us an error to say high takes zero positional arguments
but one was given.
So Python is still trying it.
It assumes that there's you know self or whatever you want to call it by itself as the convention is
set up is the first parameter but because it's empty there's no parameters.
It freaks out.
So moral of the story you need to have self in there even if you're not using it inside the method most
of the time though pretty much 100 percent of the time you will be using it inside the method until
we talk about class methods.
That's coming up.
OK.
So we have an exercise or two after this and then we're going to talk about class attributes and class
methods.
So let's get some more practice.